add notes and questions for n31405 (#790)
bitcoin-core-review-club/website: _posts/2025-03-05-#31405.md

components: ["validation"]
host: stickies-v
status: upcoming
commit: 4ba2e480ffa0b77113953bee4ff5c9349e277e7e
---

## Notes

> - The [`BlockManager::m_block_index`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/3c1f72a36700271c7c1293383549c3be29f28edb/src/node/blockstorage.h#L277) is a map which is used to keep track of which block headers exist, how they interconnect, and where on disk they are stored [^1]. Generally speaking, it is updated whenever a new valid header with sufficient Proof-of-Work (PoW) is received. It contains entries for blocks in the main chain, alternative chains, and even invalid blocks.

Reviewer: I usually associate "main / alternative" as mainnet / testnets
```suggestion
- The [`BlockManager::m_block_index`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/3c1f72a36700271c7c1293383549c3be29f28edb/src/node/blockstorage.h#L277) is a map which is used to keep track of which block headers exist, how they interconnect, and where on disk they are stored [^1]. Generally speaking, it is updated whenever a new valid header with sufficient Proof-of-Work (PoW) is received. It contains entries for blocks in the current most-PoW chain, alternative chains, and even invalid blocks.
```

> - The [`BlockManager::m_block_index`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/3c1f72a36700271c7c1293383549c3be29f28edb/src/node/blockstorage.h#L277) is a map which is used to keep track of which block headers exist, how they interconnect, and where on disk they are stored [^1]. Generally speaking, it is updated whenever a new valid header with sufficient Proof-of-Work (PoW) is received. It contains entries for blocks in the main chain, alternative chains, and even invalid blocks.

Reviewer 2: nit: where on disk the corresponding full blocks are stored.

- Block validation is a process that consists of multiple steps, gradually bumping up the `CBlockIndex`'s `nStatus` from its default-initialized `BLOCK_VALID_UNKNOWN` to `BLOCK_VALID_SCRIPTS`. The validation flow which is relevant to this PR can be summarised as:
	- When the header is successfully validated with `AcceptBlockHeader()`, it is added to `m_block_index`, and generally never removed from it anymore, even if the block fails a subsequent validation step.
	- When the partial block validation in `AcceptBlock()` succeeds, the block is persisted to disk. This validation is partial, because full validation requires the predecessor block's data, which the node may not have received yet.

> 	- As soon as a block header becomes part of the fully validated current chain, `ActivateBestChain()` will attempt to connect the block. If this final validation succeeds, the block is connected and its `nStatus` is [raised](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/3c1f72a36700271c7c1293383549c3be29f28edb/src/validation.cpp#L2762) to the ultimate `BLOCK_VALID_SCRIPTS`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	- As soon as a block header becomes part of the fully validated current chain, `ActivateBestChain()` will attempt to connect the block. If this final validation step succeeds, the block is connected and its `nStatus` is [raised](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/3c1f72a36700271c7c1293383549c3be29f28edb/src/validation.cpp#L2762) to the ultimate `BLOCK_VALID_SCRIPTS`.
```

> 	- As soon as a block header becomes part of the fully validated current chain, `ActivateBestChain()` will attempt to connect the block. If this final validation succeeds, the block is connected and its `nStatus` is [raised](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/3c1f72a36700271c7c1293383549c3be29f28edb/src/validation.cpp#L2762) to the ultimate `BLOCK_VALID_SCRIPTS`.

Reviewer 2: nit: this sounds a bit circular, maybe: "As soon as a block header becomes _eligible_ to be part of the fully validated current chain" (most PoW, all predecessors have full data).

> - `CBlockIndex` holds a `pprev` pointer to its predecessor which makes it is trivial to iterate backwards (towards the genesis block) over the block tree. Iterating forwards (towards the chain tip) is not possible, because a block can have multiple successors pointing to it. The lack of forward iteration makes operations such as finding a new best block header expensive, because we have to iterate over the entire `m_block_index` block tree again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `CBlockIndex` holds a `pprev` pointer to its predecessor which makes it trivial to iterate backwards (towards the genesis block) over the block tree. Iterating forwards (towards the chain tip) is not possible, because a block can have multiple successors pointing to it. The lack of forward iteration makes operations such as finding a new best block header expensive, because we have to iterate over the entire `m_block_index` block tree again.
```

> - `ChainstateManager::m_best_header` and `ActiveChain.Tip()` are both `CBlockIndex` pointers. During normal operation, they'll often converge to the same block with the highest PoW. However, it is crucial to distinguish their meaning and use. `ActiveChain.Tip()` returns the `CBlockIndex*` of the fully validated and connected block that is the tip of the currently active chain. `m_best_header` points to the header with the most PoW that the node knows about. It represents a node's view of what the most-PoW chain might look like, but it is possible that validation won't allow it to progress there. As such, `m_best_header` is just a hint.

Reviewer 2: maybe mention that they are very different during all of IBD.

Author: I've added "The distinction is especially visible during IBD, when `ActiveChain().Tip()` progresses towards `m_best_header`, but can only be equal to it when IBD is finished." to the end of this paragraph.

## Questions

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)? What was your review approach?

1. Which purpose(s) does `ChainstateManager::m_best_header` serve?

1. Prior to this PR, which of these statements are true, if any?
	- A) a `CBlockIndex` with an INVALID predecessor will ALWAYS have a `BLOCK_FAILED_CHILD` `nStatus`
	- B) a `CBlockIndex` with only VALID predecessors will NEVER have a `BLOCK_FAILED_CHILD` `nStatus`

1. One of the goals of this PR is to ensure `m_best_header`, and the `nStatus` of successors of an invalid block are always correctly set. Which functions are directly responsible for updating these values?

> 1. For which scenario(s), if any, can commit [validation: call InvalidChainfound also from AcceptBlock](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/163b01eae82a9dd94dcda94cf13001e46b4a8a56) introduce behaviour change?

Reviewer: The behavior is already changed within the commit, right?
```suggestion
1. For which scenario(s), if any, does commit [validation: call InvalidChainfound also from AcceptBlock](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/163b01eae82a9dd94dcda94cf13001e46b4a8a56) introduce behaviour change?
```

> 1. Most of the logic in commit [validation: in invalidateblock, calculate m_best_header right away](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/4100495125e9a06b2403f7520fae9f45c3fd9e4c) implements finding the new best header. What prevents us from just using `RecalculateBestHeader()` here? 

Reviewer: If I understand this correctly...? Just a nit for ease of parsing
```suggestion
1. Most of the logic for finding the new best header is implemented in commit [validation: in invalidateblock, calculate m_best_header right away](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/4100495125e9a06b2403f7520fae9f45c3fd9e4c). What prevents us from just using `RecalculateBestHeader()` here? 
```

Author: I think I prefer my wording - the point is that the commit (re-)implements logic that already exists in a different function. I think this is less clear in your suggestion?

Altneratively, would the below be more clear?

```suggestion
1. Most of the logic in commit [validation: in invalidateblock, calculate m_best_header right away](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/4100495125e9a06b2403f7520fae9f45c3fd9e4c) is about finding the new best header. What prevents us from just using `RecalculateBestHeader()` here? 
```

Reviewer: Just a nit, and perhaps I misunderstood! Feel free to ignore.
